In this section you will learn to administer,
pay and close out the contract.
This section should take you
approximately 30 minutes to complete.
The contract has been awarded.
You might think your work is done, right?
Not so fast! There is still more to do!
With the help of your procurement specialist,
you must now administer the contract
that you have just awarded.
Let's take a minute to see who does what.
As the manager, your responsibilities include
monitoring the timelines, deliverables,
costs, and quality of the work
against an agreed-upon work plan and statement of
work, ensuring delivery dates are met,
ensuring contractors are not treated as employees,
attending progress meetings as required,
managing the contract's expenditures or burn rate,
responding to Access to Information requests
and ministerial enquiries,
and issuing task authorizations, as required.
As for the procurement specialist,
their responsibilities include:
supporting the manager in
monitoring contract progress and financing,
attending progress meetings, as required
resolving any disputes,
amending the contract as needed,
performing contract audits,
issuing task authorizations, as needed
supporting the manager in monitoring
that delivery dates are met,
assisting the manager in responding to Access to
Information requests and ministerial enquiries,
and overseeing contract termination.
Accessibility should be a consideration
throughout the procurement process,
not only for employees, but also for contractors.
As a manager you may need to engage
with contractors about government-created barriers
that they are facing when doing the work.
Here is a quick exercise to help
you determine your responsibilities.
Now that you know who is responsible for what,
it's paperwork time!
Through the contract, you must ensure
that records are maintained.
You will need to keep information such as quality,
quantity and timelines for the goods received
or the work to be performed.
Any discrepancies in the work of a contractor
to whom a contract has been awarded
must also be documented.
It is important to maintain records
so that you can show that what has been purchased
has been delivered or that the work
has been completed, and you must verify that
the goods or services are in accordance
with the contract.
If you discover inadequate or deficient work, you
must advise the procurement specialist immediately
so that they can notify the contractor
in writing of these deficiencies.
The written notification from the procurement
specialist will remind the contractor
of their obligations under the contract
and make them aware of the consequences
of failing to correct the deficiency
within a specific time period.
Good contract monitoring and record keeping
leads to good contract management,
which helps avoid additional costs and delays,
difficulties for contractors and additional work.
After all, an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure!
Before you pay the contract,
there are a few things to do.
You must first ensure that the terms
and conditions of the contract are met.
You must check that the goods,
services or construction are
of the proper quality and in the right quantity,
confirm that the goods were received as ordered,
confirm that the work was performed,
and the services or construction
were rendered as per contract,
and if the deliverable is a report or other product,
ensure that it is complete and free of errors.
Then, once you are satisfied with the deliverable,
you must ensure that the payment terms are met.
Only once this is done can you proceed
to paying the contract.
As the certification authority under section 34
of the Financial Administration Act,
your responsibility is to ensure that the work
has been performed, that the goods supplied
or the service or construction rendered
are acceptable, that the deliverables
and the invoice are in accordance with the contract.
With some types of contracts, this responsibility
could be a shared with the procurement specialist.
You will verify the accuracy of the invoice
or claim by checking the following elements.
The invoice date issued is on
or after the date the goods or services
or construction have been rendered.
The line items claimed on the invoice
and amount for each item are accurate.
They match the order and are within the contract
unit price or per diem, and travel limits.
The currency, GST and HST,
and all applicable taxes and fees are accurate.
The supplier or payee information is accurate,
and they are eligible for payment.
The amount has not previously been paid.
Then you will determine
how the invoice will be paid.
Finally, after reviewing the payment request,
the financial officer pays the invoice
pursuant to section 33
of the Financial Administration Act.
Once a contract has been completed,
the procurement specialist responsible
for the file will close the file.
Before closing the file, a review
will be conducted to ensure the following.
All contractual requirements have been met
and the manager has received
and accepted all deliverables under the contract.
All payments to the contractor and
settlement of claims have been made.
No outstanding action is required.
All reporting requirements have been met.
All required documentation is on file.
Amendments to finalization of cost,
as required, are complete.
Also, if the intellectual property was retained
by the Government of Canada,
then the appropriate steps need to be taken.
If a product has a warranty,
the file will remain open for the warranty period.
If the file is in audit, it will remain open
until the final audit report is filed and accepted.
If there is litigation involving the file,
it cannot be closed.
A review of any lessons learned, including
any audit findings, is also done
to improve future procurement activities.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
their own ways of doing things.
Take time out from the course to see
how contracts are administered,
paid out and closed in your department.
And don't forget to check the Toolbox
for a job aid on the procurement process!
Now that you have seen how to administer,
pay out and close a contract, let's see
what you remember by taking this short quiz.